[FEATURE] Document Controllers, Registration, Validation and View (#6571)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ExtensionArchitecture/ExtbaseRewrite/View/Index.rst

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Classes/Controller/ConferenceController.php

    use MyVendor\MyExtension\Domain\Repository\ConferenceRepository;
    use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
    use TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Mvc\Controller\ActionController;

    class ConferenceController extends ActionController
    {
        public function __construct(
            protected readonly ConferenceRepository $conferenceRepository,
        ) {}

        public function listAction(): ResponseInterface
        {
            $this->view->assign('conferences', $this->conferenceRepository->findAll());
            $this->view->assign('title', 'Upcoming conferences');
            return $this->htmlResponse();
        }

        public function showAction(Conference $conference): ResponseInterface
        {
            $this->view->assignMultiple([
                'conference' => $conference,
                'speakers' => $conference->getSpeakers(),
            ]);
            return $this->htmlResponse();
        }
    }

The name passed to :php:`assign()` becomes the variable name in the template:
:html:`{conferences}`, :html:`{title}`, :html:`{conference}`.

> In addition, :php:`$this->settings` is always assigned automatically under the

Reviewer: Only FE, for BE you have to assign it yourself

Author: I rewrote that whole thing. Done.

name :html:`{settings}`, so TypoScript settings are available in every template
without an explicit assign call.

> 

Reviewer 2: I would find it helpful to mention how additional default variables can be assigned, most neccessary the site and site settings, for example 

```
    public function initializeView(): void
    {
        $this->view->assignMultiple([
            'currentContentObject' => $this->request->getAttribute('currentContentObject')->data,
            'site' => $this->request->getAttribute('site')
        ]);
    }
```

This bridges the issue that the site settings are not available out of the box

Author: done

..  _extbase-view-property-access:

How Fluid accesses object properties and collections
====================================================

When a template variable is an object, Fluid resolves a property path such as
:html:`{conference.title}` by trying the following in order:

*   A public property :php:`$title` directly.
*   A public getter method :php:`getTitle()`.
*   A public method :php:`hasTitle()`.
*   A public method :php:`isTitle()`.

This means :php:`protected` properties with a conventional getter work
transparently in templates — :html:`{conference.title}` calls
:php:`getTitle()` automatically.

..  warning::

    If none of the above exist, Fluid renders an empty string with no error or
    exception. A typo in a property name, a missing getter, or a :php:`private`
    property (which is never accessible to Fluid) will produce silent blank
    output. See
    `Template variable renders empty <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-appendix-pitfalls-template-empty>`_
    in the common pitfalls list.

> Property paths can be chained: :html:`{conference.mainSpeaker.name}` resolves

Reviewer 3: I would love if you could link to the https://docs.typo3.org/p/brainworxx/includekrexx/5.0/en-us/ extension here, to allow introspection of variables. Especially because f:debug really reveals little information due to object access and wrapping properties in dynamic "toArray" methods (which krexx can visualize)

Author: done

    :file:`list.fluid.html` and :file:`List.fluid.html` are different files.
    The convention requires an uppercase first letter.

**Bypassing the naming convention** is possible but discouraged. Passing an
explicit template path to :php:`$this->view->render()` overrides the automatic
resolution:

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Classes/Controller/ConferenceController.php

    public function listAction(): ResponseInterface
    {
        $this->view->assign('conferences', $this->conferenceRepository->findAll());
        return $this->htmlResponse(
            $this->view->render('Conference/CustomList')
        );
    }

This bypasses the controller/action convention entirely. Reserve it for rare
situations where one action needs to render a different template — for example
for AJAX variants that share a controller action.

..  _extbase-view-path-override:

Overriding Fluid template paths via TypoScript
==============================================

Add paths via TypoScript to extend or override the default resolution:

..  code-block:: typoscript
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Sets/MyExtension/setup.typoscript

>     plugin.tx_myextension.view {

Reviewer: Here you use the extension related path again. Is OK, but please streamline with your other parts of the documentation

Author: done

        templateRootPaths.10 = EXT:my_extension/Resources/Private/Templates/
        layoutRootPaths.10 = EXT:my_extension/Resources/Private/Layouts/
        partialRootPaths.10 = EXT:my_extension/Resources/Private/Partials/
    }

Because Fluid searches from the highest key downward, a path at key
:typoscript:`10` takes precedence over the default at key :typoscript:`0`.

**Finding the TypoScript object path for a plugin:** open the TYPO3 backend,
navigate to the site or page where the plugin resides, and open
:guilabel:`Site Management > TypoScript`. The Active TypoScript module shows
the fully assembled TypoScript tree including all registered plugin objects.

> The object path for a plugin is always :typoscript:`plugin.tx_<extensionkey>`,

Reviewer: The path for a "Plugin" would be plugin.tx_myextension_myplugin. To have the some configuration for all plugins of an extension you would use plugin.tx_myextension

Author: done

where the extension key is lowercased and has underscores removed.

..  _extbase-view-third-party-override:

Overriding Fluid templates from a third-party extension
=======================================================

To replace a template provided by an extension you do not control, add the

> override paths to your own extension or sitepackage — never modify the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
override paths to your own extension or site package — never modify the
```

Author: done

third-party extension directly. Add a path at a key higher than the one the
original extension uses. Most extensions register their paths at key
:typoscript:`10` or leave the default at key :typoscript:`0`. Using key
:typoscript:`20` in your sitepackage is therefore safe in the majority of
cases:

..  code-block:: typoscript
    :caption: EXT:my_sitepackage/Configuration/Sets/MySitepackage/setup.typoscript

    plugin.tx_thirdpartyextension.view {
        templateRootPaths.20 = EXT:my_sitepackage/Resources/Private/ThirdParty/Templates/
        partialRootPaths.20 = EXT:my_sitepackage/Resources/Private/ThirdParty/Partials/
    }

Place your overriding template at the same relative path as the original —
:file:`Conference/List.fluid.html` overrides :file:`Conference/List.fluid.html`
from the third-party extension.

> **Extension loading order:** for the path override to work, your extension must

Reviewer 2: Makes more sense to talk about set loading order here

Author: done

> be loaded after the third-party extension so its TypoScript is applied last.

Reviewer: Yes, would be good to do so in general, but not needed for TypoScript include ordering or site set ordering

Author: done

Declare the dependency in your :file:`composer.json`:

..  code-block:: json
    :caption: EXT:my_sitepackage/composer.json

    {
        "require": {
            "vendor/thirdpartyextension": "^3.0"
        }
    }

This ensures Composer resolves your extension after the dependency. See
:ref:`extension-loading-order` for the full details.

..  seealso::

    *   `Template file not found, or wrong template rendered <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-appendix-pitfalls-template-not-found>`_
        — common causes and how to debug them.

..  _extbase-view-viewhelpers:

> ViewHelpers in Fluid templates

Reviewer 3: Please mention Fluid Component, which basically allow to write partials as ViewHelpers and are adjacent to this

Author: done

==============================

`ViewHelpers <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:start>`_
are the Fluid equivalent of template functions and tags. They handle
conditionals, loops, links, formatting, and much more. The built-in ViewHelpers
use the :html:`f:` namespace, which is available in every template without
declaration.

Two equivalent syntaxes exist — tag style and inline style:

..  code-block:: html
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Resources/Private/Templates/Conference/List.fluid.html

    <!-- Tag style -->
    <f:for each="{conferences}" as="conference">
        <f:if condition="{conference.published}">
            <h2>{conference.title}</h2>
            <p><f:format.date format="d.m.Y">{conference.conferenceDate}</f:format.date></p>
            <f:link.action action="show" arguments="{conference: conference}">
                Details
            </f:link.action>
        </f:if>
    </f:for>

    <!-- Inline style (useful inside HTML attributes) -->

>     <a href="{f:uri.action(action: 'show', arguments: '{conference: conference}')}">

Reviewer: Please add inline style for f:format.date, too

Author: done

*   `f:link.action <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-link-action>`_
    — generate links to controller actions.
*   `f:uri.action <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-uri-action>`_
    — generate action URIs for use inside attributes.
*   `f:format.date <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-format-date>`_
    — format date objects and timestamps.
*   `f:flashMessages <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-flashmessages>`_
    — render flash messages added by the controller.
*   `f:form <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-form>`_
    — build forms with automatic :php:`__trustedProperties` token generation.
*   `f:translate <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-translate>`_
    — render localised labels from :file:`locallang.xlf`.
*   `f:debug <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:typo3-fluid-debug>`_
    — dump a variable's type and value during development; remove before
    deploying to production.

For the complete reference of all built-in ViewHelpers see the
`ViewHelper reference <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3viewhelper:start>`_.

> To write your own ViewHelper, see

Reviewer 2: Maybe also hint at [Using Fluid components](https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:using-fluid-components)?

Author: done
